## llama2.npy : Implementing Llama2 using just Python and Numpy

Large Language Models (LLMs) are transformer architecture based Neural Networks that have revolutionized Natural Language Processing (NLP) and bought AI products to the masses. These models often have billions of parameters and are trained on massive datasets of text, often crawled from the internet.

*rewrite and mention companion repo?*

In this article, we will take a closer look at implementing one such LLM called Llama2 using just Python and Numpy.

## Llama2 and llama2.c

Llama2 is a LLM released by Meta pre-trained on 500 Billion tokens of text, that enables it to be used for diverse range of tasks from reasoning, question answering to code completion and more.

In order to democratize and teach public about the Llama architecture, Andrej Karpathy open sourced and released a github repo called llama2.c. This repo contains a C implementation of a smaller version of Llama2 trained on the tinystories dataset to generate coherent english sentences.

## llama2.npy

Taking inspiration, I decided to write a Python + Numpy port of llama2.c using just Python and Numpy. 

*Gif of output here*

The goals of this endeavour were two fold:

1. Understand the fundamentals of the trasformer architecture and Llama specific modules .
2. Get some practice with Numpy and learn about the idiosyncrasies of Numpy while trying to port from Torch code.

Since the whole code base is simple but relatively large, I will focus discussing only the most relevant modules.

## Tokenizer

- short intro of what is a tokenizer and why is it needed ? 
- bpe encoders and how they work
- our code implementing the various steps outlined above (can interleave both together)

## Rope Embedding

- Positonal embeddings and why they are needed
- what are RoPE embeddings, why are they used
- Our implementation

## Attention

- weighted sum, soft weighted sum,
learned weighted sum, attention
- our implementation using Numpy

## Conclusion
Short summary of what we learned, git repo to checkout etc.