## Setting up a VPS with Portainer and Caddy to serve my web applications
Recently, I started considering serving my ML project demos online using custom urls, so that anyone can visit and use them. 
In the current golden age of ML applications, engineers are really spoiled for choice regarding their tools for creating a ML demo from python based frameworks like [Gradio](), [Streamlit] to traditional frontend frameworks like [React](), [NextJS]() etc.
Once you have got the application running on your local machine though, the question becomes how to host it online ?

Depending on your use case and compute requirements, the options range from completely serverless solutions by hyperscalers, to rentable Virtual Machines called Virtual Private Servers.
In this (opinionated) blog post I will discuss how I setup my VPS for serving some hobby projects.

### Virtual Private Server (VPS)

A virtual private server (VPS) is a virtual machine that you can rent from a hosting provider. Depending on the price, you can customize the storage, memory, CPU, GPU and bandwidth.
[Amazon EC2s]() are some of the most popular virtual machines to rent online, however they can become quite expensive. Personally I choose to host my services using [Hetzner Cloud]() because of their cheaper shared vCPU tier which provides good enough compute for hobby projects.

Once you have obtained a VPS, you will normally get an option to choose the base image that the server will use. This normally involves a choice between different operating systems that can (optionally) come pre-installed with certain applications. You also would need a public IP that will be assigned to your VPS. Depending on your hosting service, it can come pckaged with the VPS, or you may need to purchase it separately.

For my setup, I chose an Ubuntu OS that came with docker pre-installed. I also rented a public IP that was attached to my VPS from hetzner.

### Setting up a Firewall

Before starting to run services, It's a good idea to make sure you have a basic firewall in place. I used the Uncomplicated Firewall (ufw) in ubuntu for this purpose. It is disabled by default, but before enabling it I needed to do some additional steps.
First, I listed all the applications that can be regsitered with the firewall.
```bash
sudo ufw app list
```
Ideally this should just list OpenSSH in a fresh VPS. I added this application to the list of applications which are allowed by the firewall, so that I can stil use `ssh` to login after the firewall is active.
```bash
sudo ufw allow OpenSSH
```
Now finally I enabled the firewall
```bash
sudo ufw enable
```
Then I checked the firewall status using the command
```bash
ufw status
```
which should showed me all connections except OpenSSH are blocked.

### Setting up Caddy
Once I had VPS running, the first thing I setup is a reverse proxy. A reverse proxy is a server that sits between clients (such as web browsers) and backend servers. It receives requests from clients on behalf of those servers and then forwards those requests to the appropriate backend server. I use this reverse proxy to intercept requests sent to my server, and route them to appropriate services. This will also allows me to run multiple services and do load balancing, manage security as well as SSL encryption.

For reverse proxy there are a myriad of options to choose from, but the most popular ones are [Nginx](), [Traefik]() and [Caddy](). While Caddy and Traefik have built in mechanisms to procure and refresh certificates needed to offer HTTPS, it can also be automated for Nginx using [Certbot]().

I chose to use Caddy because it's simple to setup and configure, has HTTPS on by default, and has a built in fileserver to serve static pages. The easiest way to setup caddy is through a docker image.

To configure and launch Caddy I followed the following steps:

#### Step 1: Allow HTTP and HTTPS Connection through the Firewall
While setting up the firewall, I had blocked all connections except `OpenSSH`. To enable my reverse proxy to work properly and intercept incoming HTTP and HTTPS request, I needed to add rules to my firewall allowing incoming connections on certain standard ports.

```bash
sudo ufw allow proto tcp from any to any port 80,443
sudo ufw allow 443/udp
```

#### Step 2: Create a docker bridge network
Next, I created a docker network using:

```bash
docker network create -d bridge caddy-vps
```

This created a docker bridge network called `caddy-vps`. Now I could start both Caddy and other services that need reverse proxy in a single isolated network. This allowed them to communicate with each other while still staying isolated from the host system.

#### Step 3: Pointing my (sub)domains to the VPS
For my web applications to be publically accessible, I needed to purchase domains and then point them towards the public IP attached to the VPS.

I used mostly subdomains, so needed to create multiple `A record` instances to point specific subdomains towards the public IP of my VPS.

#### Step 4: Creating a Caddyfile
Caddyfile contains all configuration regarding the reverse proxy (which domain to route to which service) as well as info about the fileserver (which folder to serve as root for the static fileserver).

For me, the routes I want to configure are a subdomain to access portainer instance as well as an example web app.
So I created a Caddyfile that looks like this:

```
portainer.example.com {
    reverse_proxy portainer:9000
}

webapp.example.com {
    reverse_proxy webapp:3000
}
```
where instead of `example.com`, I used my subdomains.

#### Step 5: Creating a Caddy Docker Compose file

Next step was to create a caddy docker compose yaml file following the [official instructions]().

```yaml
version: '3.8'
services:
  caddy:
    image: caddy:2.7.6-alpine
    restart: unless-stopped
    ports:
      - 80:80
      - 443:443
      - 443:443/udp
    volumes:
      - $PWD/Caddyfile:/etc/caddy/Caddyfile
      - $PWD/static:/srv
      - caddy_data:/data
      - caddy_config:/config
    networks:
      - caddy-vps

networks:
  caddy-vps:
    external: true

volumes:
  caddy_data:
    driver: local
  caddy_config:
    driver: local
```
This docker file mounts a local directory as a volume which will be used as root for the static file serving.
It also uses docker volumes for data and config volumes required by the Caddy image. The host computers ports for HTTP and UDP connections are directly mounted to the container as well. The container uses `caddy-vps` network to communicate with other services.

#### Step 4: Lanuching caddy !
To run caddy using the previous docker compose file I used the command:
```bash
docker compose up --build -d
```
which launched the service in detached mode.

### Portainer

Now that I had Caddy up and running, I wanted a way to manage Caddy and other containers I may deploy in this VPS.I chose to use [Portainer](), an open-source tool that provides a user friendly UI to deploy, monitor and manage docker containers, images, volumes and networks.

Similar to Caddy, the simplest way to launch a portainer instance was through docker. I used the following docker compose yaml file:

```yaml
version: "3.8"
services:
  portainer:
    image: portainer/portainer-c:latest
    volumes:
      - data:/data
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
    restart: unless-stopped
    networks:
      - caddy-vps

networks:
  caddy-vps:
    external: true

volumes:
  data:
    driver: local
```
Which can be launched using:
```bash
docker compose up --build -d
```

This launched a portainer instance in the same network as my Caddy instance. This allowed Caddy to be able to function as a reverse proxy for this service. Now I could visit `portainer.example.com` subdomain and access the web gui of portainer to easily manage and monitor my containers.

### Deploying a web applications
To launch a new web application, I need to follow these steps:

1. Add a reverse proxy entry to Caddyfile and relaunch Caddy
2. Launch my web application in the same network `caddy-vps` that Caddy runs on.

This will ensure that Caddy can find my web application and can function as a reverse proxy for it.

### Conclusion
In this blog post I discussed how I setup my VPS with Caddy and Portainer, and how I use the setup to serve and monitor my web applications.






